* McLaren et al., (1995) distinguished between the prototype and peak shift effects. Using checkerboard stimuli across 3 experiments (the differences between these experiments don’t appear too important), they distinguish the prototype and peak shift effects. The prototype effect is when the categorisation of a previously-unseen (and untrained) prototype is more accurate than the categorisation of previously seen exemplars (which were derived from the prototype). The prototype effect doesn’t seem quite relevant to our manuscript, so I won’t go further into this effect. The peak shift effect, however, describes the increase in categorisation ‘accuracy' of more extreme transfer (i.e., untrained) exemplars than than previously trained exemplars. The assumption here is that the stimuli are categorised with some simple rule (can be separated by a single line in 2-d similarity space?). 
* Thoughts: Ok - I think this is interesting, but I am not sure we can use this to show the strength of models that involve category contrast (both SD-GCM and PACKER) because standard GCM can predict peak shift (see int/ext and diagonal conditions of Nosofsky 1986 – more extreme stimuli here have higher frequencies of a particular category label than less extreme stimuli). Stewart and Brown (2005) talk about this as a strength of SD-GCM, but they also don’t show how the GCM cannot do this (I think it’s a weaker section of their paper). McLaren and colleagues (1995) mention GCM only to show how it makes the wrong predictions in the relative strength of prototype vs peak shift, but since PACKER is not concerned (currently) with this distinction, discussion on the peak shift effect in general may be of limited utility.
    * One possible avenue for future work - see if GCM and SD-GCM can distinguish between prototype vs peak shift, and if PACKER can do better? 


