# Category Generation Project

## Introduction

One of our most intriguing cognitive capabilities is the ability to generate new ideas and concepts. Early research in creative cognition by Ward & colleagues (see papers below), as well as more recent work in category generation (Jern & Kemp, 2013), establishes several key observations about concept generation:

1. **Generation is constrained by existing knowledge**. In a trivial sense this *must* be true: if ideas are not generated completely spontaneously, then they must be based on prior knowledge. Whereas Ward & colleagues observed that people generate new animals, tools, fruits, etc, with the same broad structural properties of real examples, Jern & Kemp found that people generate new artificial categories using the distributional characteristics of existing categories.
2. **New ideas differ from existing concepts**. Again, there is a trivial sense in which this must be true: people *can* create new concepts.  That is, people do not simply copy existing ideas and examples; they change those examples (presumably in a systematic manner) to create something new. In work by Ward & colleagues, these changes were often minimal, but they also were constrained by theory-based knowledge (e.g., animals are generated with properties that make sense within an environment).
3. **Exemplars can limit creative ability**. Ward & colleagues have found that, when people are provided with concrete examples of generated concepts, creativity is severely limited (compared to uncued generation). 

The majority of research on concept generation has focused on how existing knowledge guides development of new ideas. The processes determining the 'creative leap' (observation #2) have, by contrast, been consistently marginalized. Whereas Ward & colleagues have identified a few salient characteristics (novel contributions commonly conform to theory-based knowledge), Jern & Kemp (2013) simply view it as a random alteration. The purpose of this project is to more throughly characterize this creative leap using behavioral experiments, and to explain the results with formal models.

### Review of Ward's work on Creativity

Perhaps the first systematic exploration of the creative use of conceptual knowledge was conducted by Ward & colleagues. Below, I review some of the main findings.

____

#### Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., & Schumacher, J. (1993).  Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation task. Memory & Cognition, 21, 837-845. [PDF](pdf/SmithWardSchumacher1993.pdf)

Participants were asked to draw and describe examples of toys and animals that might exist on another planet similar to Earth. In a control condition, generation was spontaneous. In the focal condition, generation was cued by known examples that had a least one common property. The properties exhibited by the provided examples were more frequently generated by participants in the cued condition, which was labeled by the authors as a "*conformity*" effect. The conformity effect did not diminish even when a 23 minute delay was introduced between the cues and the generation task. 

____

#### Ward, T. B. (1994).  Structured imagination: The role of category structure in exemplar generation.  Cognitive Psychology, 27, 1-40. [PDF](pdf/wardcp1994.pdf)

Participants were asked to draw and describe examples of plants and animals that might exist on other planets. The main findings are: (A) people generated alien animals using the same structural forms as earth animals (e.g., eyes, legs, wings) but had some (usually limited) difference to earth animals, (B) animals drawn from the same species were less variable than animals drawn from different species, (C) novel animals obeyed the same feature correlations as earth animals (e.g., feathers tended to co-occur with wings), and (D) novel animals were adapted to their environment (i.e., people use theory-based knowledge). All of this is to suggest that prior knowledge is a central aspect of imagination, and that theories of categorization capture a lot of how prior knowledge is used.

____

#### Marsh, R. L., Ward, T. B., & Landau, J. D. (1999). The inadvertent use of prior knowledge in a generative cognitive task. Memory & Cognition, 27, 94-105. [PDF](http://bama.ua.edu/~tward/marshetalm&c1999.pdf)

Similarly to Smith, Ward, & Schumacher (1993), this paper focuses on the effect of cues on generation. Participants were asked to generate novel nonwords for categories of objects. They were provided with examples that all shared a common orthographic structure, and were asked to not generate examples using those features. Several experiments attempted to reduce the effects of the cues on generation, but were unsuccessful (in one experiment, participants were asked to list the features they should avoid, but then failed to avoid them....). The results speak to the influence of (at least relatively recent) experience in creative generation.

____

#### Ward, T. B., Patterson, M. J., Sifonis, C. M., Dodds, R. A., & Saunders, K. N. (2002).  The role of graded category structure in imaginative thought. Memory & Cognition, 30, 199-216. [PDF](http://bama.ua.edu/~tward/wardetalm&c2002.pdf)

At this point in time, it was well established that existing concepts constrain the formation of new ideas. But it is not well known exactly what properties of conceptual structures are most influential. One theory is that, when people attempt to create a new concept, they bring to mind examples of an existing concept and change one or two things (see papers reviewed above). If this were the case, then representative examples of a concept (which are easier to retrieve in memory) should more strongly influence the development of new ideas. Participants in the experiments were asked to draw/describe examples of new animals, tools, and fruits. A separate group of subjects performed a semantic fluency task (listing 20 real items of each category), which provided a metric of the representativeness of real exemplars. The generation participants reported relying on specific real exemplars as inspiration, and the exemplars used were strongly correlated with the semantic fluency data. 


____
